[Applause]
one year ago I rented a car in Jerusalem
to go find a man I never met but it
would change my life I didn't have a
phone number to call to say I was coming
I didn't have an exact address but I
knew his name Abed I knew that he lived
in a town of 15,000 var Cara and I knew
that 21 years before just outside this
holy city
he broke my neck and so on an overcast
morning in January I headed north off in
a silver Chevy to find a man and some
peace the road dropped and I exited
Jerusalem I then rounded the very bend
where his blue truck had me with 4 tons
of floor tiles had bored down with great
speed onto the back left corner of the
minibus where I sat I was then nineteen
years old I grown 5 inches and done some
20,000 push-ups in eight months and the
night before the crash I delighted in my
new body playing basketball with friends
into the wee hours of a May morning
Aipom the ball of my large right hand
and when that hand reached the rim I
felt invincible I was off in the bus to
get the Peet side one on the court I
didn't see Abed coming from my seat that
was looking up at a stone town on a
hilltop Brighton the noontime Sun went
from behind there was a great bang as
loud and violent as a bomb my head
snapped back over my red seat my eardrum
blew my shoes flew off I flew to my head
bobbing on broken bones and when I
landed I was a quadriplegic over the
coming months I learned to breathe on my
own than to sit and to stand and to walk
but my body was now divided vertically I
was a hemiplegic and back home in New
York I used a wheelchair for four years
all through college college ended and I
returned to Jerusalem for a year there I
rose for
my chair for good I leaned on my cane
and I looked back finding all four my
fellow passengers in the bus two
photographs of the crash and when I saw
this photograph I didn't see a bloody
and unmoving body
I saw the healthy bulk about left
deltoid and I mourned that it was lost
warned all I had not yet done but was
now impossible it was then I read the
testimony that Abed gave the morning
after the crash I'm driving down the
right lane of a highway toward Jerusalem
reading his words I weld with anger it
was the first time I'd felt anger toward
this man and it came from magical
thinking on this Xerox piece of paper
the crash had not yet happened Abed
could still turn his wheel left so that
I would see him whoosh by out my window
and I would remain whole be careful of
it look out slowed down but Abba did not
slow and loved that Xerox piece of paper
my neck again broke and again I was left
without anger I decided to find a bed
and when I finally did he responds it to
my Hebrew hello with such nonchalance it
seemed he'd been awaiting my phone call
and maybe he had I didn't mention to up
and his prior driving record
twenty-seven violations by the age of 25
the last is not shifting his truck into
a low gear on that May Day and I didn't
mention my prior record the quadriplegia
and the catheters the insecurity and the
loss and when Alban went on about how
hurt he was in the crash I didn't say
that I knew from the police report that
he'd escaped serious injury I said I
wanted to meet Abed said that I should
call back in a few weeks and when I did
and a recording told me that his number
was disconnected
I let Abed and the crash
many years passed I walked with my cane
and my ankle brace and a backpack on
trips and six continents
I had pitched over hand in a weekly
softball game that I started in Central
Park and home in New York I became a
journalist and an author
typing hundreds of thousands of words
with one finger a Fred pointed out to me
that all of my big stories mirrored my
own each central got a life that had
changed in an instant Oh enough not to a
crash than to an inheritance a swing of
the bat a click of the shutter and
arrest each of us had a before and an
after I've been working through my lot
after all still Abed was far from my
mind when last year I returned to Israel
to write of the crash and the book I
then wrote half life was nearly complete
when I recognized that I still wanted to
meet Abed and finally I understood why
to hear this man say two words I'm sorry
people apologize for less and so I got a
cop to confirm that Abed still lived
somewhere in the same town and I was now
driving to it with a potted yellow rose
in the backseat when suddenly flowers
seemed a ridiculous offering but what to
get the man who broke your neck
I pulled into the town of Abu Ghosh and
bought a brick of Turkish Delight
pistachios glued in rosewater better
back on highway one I envisioned what
awaited Abed would hug me
Abed would spin at me Abed would say I'm
sorry I then began to wonder as I had
many times before how my life would have
been different had this man not injured
me had my genes been fed a different
helping of experience who was I was I
who I had been before the crash
before this road divided my life like
the spine of an open book was I would
have been done to me or all of us the
results of things done to us done for us
the infidelity of a parent or spouse
money inherited when we instead our
bodies their inborn endowments and
deficits it seemed that we could be
nothing more than genes and experience
but how to tease out the one from the
other
as Yeats put that same Universal
question
obody swayed to music Oh brightening
glance how can we know the dancer from
the dance I'd been driving for an hour
when I looked in my rearview mirror and
saw my own brightening glance the light
my eyes had carried for as long as they
had been blue the predispositions and
impulses that had propelled me as a
toddler to try and slip over a boat into
a Chicago lake that had propelled me as
a team to jump into Wilde Cape Cod Bay
after a hurricane but I also saw in my
reflection that had Abed not injured me
I would now in all likelihood be a
doctor and a husband and a father I
would be less mindful of time and of
death and oh I would not be disabled
would not suffer the thousand slings and
arrows of my fortune the frequent Ferol
of Five Fingers the chips in my teeth
come from biting at all the many things
a solitary hand cannot open the dancer
and the dance were hopelessly entwined
it was approaching eleven when I exited
right toward a fula and passed the large
quarry in
was soon in quark era I felt a pang of
nerves but show Pal was on the radio
seven beautiful mazurkas and I pulled
into a lot by a gas station to listen
and to come I've been told that in an
Arab town one need only mentioned the
name of a local and it will be
recognized and I was mentioning Abed and
myself noting deliberately that I was
here in peace to the people in this town
when I met Mohamed outside a post office
at noon he listened to me you know it
was most often when speaking to people
that I wondered where I ended and my
disability began for many people told me
what they told no one else many cried
and one day after a woman I met on the
street did the same and I later asked
her why she told me that best she could
tell her tears and had something to do
with my being happy and strong but
vulnerable too
I listened to her words I suppose they
were true how is me but I was now me
despite a limp and that I suppose was
what now made me me anyway
Mohamed told me what perhaps he would
not have told another stranger he led me
to a house of cream stucco then drove
off and as I sat contemplating what to
say a woman approached in a black shawl
and black robe I stepped from my car and
said Shalom and identified myself and
she told me that her husband Abbott
would be home from work in four hours
her Hebrew was not good and she later
confessed that she thought that I had
come to install the Internet
I drove off then returned at 4:30
thankful to the minaret up the road that
helped me find my way back and as I
approached the front door Ovid saw me my
jeans and flannel and cane and I saw
Abed an average-looking man of average
size he wore black and white slippers
over socks pilling sweatpants a piebald
sweater a striped ski cap hold that it
was Farhad he'd been expecting me
Mohammad had phoned and so at once we
shook hands and smiled and I gave him my
gift and he told me I was a guest in his
home and we sat beside one another on a
fabric couch it was dead that Abed
resumed at once the tale of woe he had
begun over the phone 16 years before he
just had surgery on his eyes he said he
had problems with his side and his legs
to an O he'd lost his teeth in the crash
did I wish to see him remove them Abed
then rose and turned on the TVs but I
wouldn't be alone when he left the room
and returned with Polaroids of the crash
and his old driver's license I was
handsome he said we looked down at his
laminated mug Abed had been less
handsome than substantial with thick
black hair and a full face and a wide
neck it was this youth who on May 16th
1990 had broken two necks including mine
and bruised one brain and taken one life
21 years later he was now finner than
his wife his skin slack on his face and
looking at Abed looking at his young
self i remembered looking at that
photograph of my young self after the
crash and recognised his longing the
crash changed both of our lives I said
ah but then showed me a picture of his
mashed truck and said that the crash was
the fault of a bus driver in the left
lane who did not let him pass I did not
want to recap the crash with Abed I'd
hoped for something simpler to exchange
a Turkish desert for two words and be on
my way and so I didn't point out that in
his own testimony the morning after the
crash Abed did not even mention the
Shriver no I was quiet I was quiet
because I had not come for truth I had
come for remorse and so I now went
looking for remorse and through truth
under the bus I understand I said that
the crash was not your fault
but does it make you sad that others
suffered
I've been spoke three quick words yes I
suffered ibid then told me why it
suffered he lived in unholy life before
the crash and so God had ordained the
crash but now he said he was religious
and God was pleased it was then that God
intervened news on the TV of a car wreck
that hours before had killed three
people up north we looked up at the
wreckage strange I said strange
he agreed I had the thought that there
on Route 804 there were perpetrators and
victims dyads bound by a crash some as
an abbot would forget the date some as
that I would remember the report
finished and Abed's spoke it is a pity
he said that the police in this country
are not tough enough on bad drivers I
was baffled Abbott had said something
remarkable did it point up the degree to
which he'd absolved himself of the crash
was it evidence of guilt and assertion
that he should have been put away longer
he served six months in prison lost his
truck license for a decade
I forgot my discretion um Abed I said I
thought you had a few driving issues
before the crash well he said I once
went 60 in a 40 and so 27 violations
driving through a red light driving an
excessive speed driving on the wrong
side of a barrier and finally riding his
brakes down that hill reduced to one and
it was then I understood that no matter
how stark the reality the human being
fits it into a narrative that is
palatable the goat becomes the hero the
perpetrator becomes the victim
it was then I understood that Abed would
ever apologize I bet and I sat with our
coffee we'd spent 90 minutes together
and he was now known to me he was not a
particularly bad man or a particularly
good man he was a limited man who found
it within himself to be kind to me with
a nod to Jewish custom he told me that I
should live to be a hundred and twenty
years old but it was hard for me to
relate to one who had so completely
washed his hands of his own calamitous
doing to one whose life was so
unexamined that he said he thought two
people had died in the crash there was
much I wish to say to Abed I wish to
tell him that worried to acknowledge my
disability it would be okay for people
are wrong to marvel at those like me who
smile as we limp people don't know that
they have lived through worse that
problems of the heart hit with a force
greater than a runaway truck that
problems on the mind are greater still
more injurious than a hundred broken
necks I wish to tell him that one makes
most of us who we are most of all it's
not our minds and not our bodies and not
what happens to us but how we respond to
what happens to us this wrote the
psychiatrist Viktor Frankl is the last
of the human freedoms to choose one's
attitude in any given set of
circumstances I wish to tell him that
not only paralyzers and paralyzed these
must evolve reconciled to reality but we
all must be aging and the anxious and
the divorced and the balding and the
bankrupt and everyone I wish to tell him
that one does not have to say that a bad
thing is good that a crash is from God
and so a crash is good a broken neck is
good hood can say that a bad thing sucks
but that this natural world still has
many glories I wish to tell him that in
the end our mandate is clear we have to
rise a
bad fortune we have to be in the good
and enjoy the good study and work an
adventure and friendship Oh friendship
and community and love but most of all I
wish to tell him what Herman Melville
wrote that truly to enjoy bodily warmth
some small part of you must be cold for
there is no quality in this world that
is not what it is merely by contrast yes
contrast if you are mindful of what you
do not have you may be truly mindful of
what you do have and if the gods are
kind you may truly enjoy what you have
that is the one singular gift you may
receive if you suffer in any existential
way you know death and so may wake each
morning pulsing with ruddy life some
part of you was cold and so another part
may truly enjoy what it is to be warm or
even to be cold when one morning years
after the crash I stepped on the stone
and the underside of my left foot felt a
flash of cold nerves that lasts awake it
was exhilarating a gust of snow but I
didn't say these things to Abed I told
him only that he had killed one man not
two I told him the name of that man and
then I said goodbye thank you
thank you
[Music]